TSIS 1: PhoneBook — Extended Contact Management

1. Objective

Extend the PhoneBook application from Practice 7 and Practice 8 with an enriched data model, advanced console interactions, and new database-side logic. The goal is to go beyond basic CRUD and stored procedures by introducing relational schema design, multi-field search, and file-based data exchange.

2. Base (already done in Practice 7–8)

Done in	Feature
Practice 7	CRUD operations via psycopg2
Practice 7	CSV import, console-based data entry
Practice 7	Query by name / phone prefix, update, delete
Practice 8	Pattern-search function (name / phone)
Practice 8	Upsert procedure, bulk-insert with validation
Practice 8	Paginated query function (LIMIT / OFFSET)
Practice 8	Delete procedure by username or phone
Do not re-implement anything from the list above.

3. Tasks

3.1 Extended Contact Model

Update the database schema to support richer contact data:

Multiple phone numbers per contact — create a separate phones table with a foreign key to contacts (1-to-many). Each phone has a type: home, work, or mobile.
Email address — add an email field to the contacts table.
Birthday — add a birthday field (DATE type).
Contact group/category — create a groups table (Family, Work, Friend, Other) and link each contact to a group via a foreign key.
Example schema extension:

CREATE TABLE groups (
    id   SERIAL PRIMARY KEY,
    name VARCHAR(50) UNIQUE NOT NULL
);

ALTER TABLE contacts
    ADD COLUMN email    VARCHAR(100),
    ADD COLUMN birthday DATE,
    ADD COLUMN group_id INTEGER REFERENCES groups(id);

CREATE TABLE phones (
    id         SERIAL PRIMARY KEY,
    contact_id INTEGER REFERENCES contacts(id) ON DELETE CASCADE,
    phone      VARCHAR(20)  NOT NULL,
    type       VARCHAR(10)  CHECK (type IN ('home', 'work', 'mobile'))
);
3.2 Advanced Console Search & Filter

Extend the console interface to support:

Filter by group — show only contacts belonging to a selected category.
Search by email — partial match (e.g. searching gmail returns all Gmail contacts).
Sort results — allow the user to sort the output by: name, birthday, or date added.
Paginated navigation — the existing pagination function from Practice 8 is already in the DB; now build a console loop that lets the user navigate pages with next / prev / quit.
3.3 Import / Export

Export to JSON — write all contacts (including phones and group) to a .json file.
Import from JSON — read contacts from a .json file and insert them into the DB. On duplicate (same name), ask the user: skip or overwrite.
Extend CSV import — update the existing CSV importer from Practice 7 to handle the new fields (email, birthday, group, phone type).
3.4 New Stored Procedures (PL/pgSQL)

Add the following server-side objects (do not duplicate procedures from Practice 8):

Procedure add_phone(p_contact_name VARCHAR, p_phone VARCHAR, p_type VARCHAR) — adds a new phone number to an existing contact.
Procedure move_to_group(p_contact_name VARCHAR, p_group_name VARCHAR) — moves a contact to a different group; creates the group if it does not exist.
Function search_contacts(p_query TEXT) — extends the Practice 8 pattern-search to also match against email and all phones in the phones table (since the schema now has multiple phones in a separate table).
3.5 Save to GitHub

Example repository structure:

TSIS1/
├── phonebook.py
├── config.py
├── connect.py
├── schema.sql
├── procedures.sql
└── contacts.csv
4. What You Must Complete

✅ Updated schema: phones table, groups table, email and birthday fields
✅ Console: filter by group, search by email, sort by name / birthday / date
✅ Console: paginated navigation using the existing DB function
✅ Export contacts to JSON
✅ Import contacts from JSON with duplicate handling
✅ Procedure add_phone
✅ Procedure move_to_group
✅ Function search_contacts covering all fields and all phone numbers
✅ Push to GitHub with clear commit messages